Well, tell me about, let's just enter generally if we can.
Is this the flip side of how we die, as some of the reviewers have been suggesting?
Yeah, well, one of the interesting things that's happened is that
In at least half of the reviews, the headline is How We Live, and they just can't resist that.
Or if they don't do that, it's in the body of the review somewhere.
I don't know that it's the flip side.
I think it's a continuation of this thing, we're all interested in the human condition.
I like that.
I consider my new book a companion to my earlier book and not in any way a sequel.
Well, that's right.
It's a body of work.
You're broadening your consideration of the subject, it seems to me.
If you're really a nonfiction writer, it's because you're fascinated with a huge area.
So you write a book that has to do with part of that area.
The next book is going to grow out of the same area.
My fascination is with the human, well, you might say the function
You might say the culture.
You might say everything we are.
And that's why I went into medicine.
I remember so well, and I was thinking about it just the other day because I came across an old autograph book from sixth grade where it said, profession.
I had written biologist.
And I remember that so clearly that I was intrigued by biology.
You know, I had
found some animals on one of our field trips and dissected them and done stuff like this.
And I, anatomy and physiology, especially physiology, how these things work, intrigued me, fascinated me, magnetized me because I didn't know anything about it and I wanted to learn more.
I was a little bit like a young John Hunter in that regard, except he had a greater imagination than I do.
So when it came time
to choose a college course, and we had these categories, the only category that seemed to fit my interest in how the body worked with being with people.
I always needed to be with people.
I always felt that my education came from conversations, from contact, and that had a lot to do with my family upbringing.
What combined an interest in biology?
Well, the only thing that fit was medicine.
So it's not as if I was burning to become a doctor.
I was burning to learn about how human beings get on in this world.
In fact, there's a line in How We Die.
You know, you write things and you forget about them, and three years later you write something else, and it's, my God, of course, it's prescient.
It's prescient.
In Doctors I wrote it.
In Doctors I wrote this big thing about the human spirit and the introduction.
And whoever thought I'd be writing a book about the human spirit.
Of course the spirit comes into this book again, doesn't it?
Right.
In a profound way, I think.
Well, in How We Die, I say this thing.
I am not interested in the cosmos.
I'm interested in the microcosm, how we make our way in the world.
So this became largely an outgrowth of that.
And I have to tell you that Glenn suggested that this would be a very good way to continue to explore my interest, the book about the human body.
Of course, his concept, as it always is, was rather skeletal, talk about anatomy and physiology.
That's the best way, though, to get an idea and let you develop it.
Yeah, that's right.
It becomes your own, and you create it, embroider it, construct it any way you want to.
The wisdom of the body becomes a continuation of my, I know it sounds grandiose, personal exploration of what we are, what human society is, what individual human beings are, and why they interact with each other the way they do.
And it's always been my contention.
I've never understood that except for philosophers, except for Aristotle, philosophers
have never taken into account, when they try to describe how our minds work and what we are and what the universe is, they've never taken into account the equipment that we come with.
They've never taken into account, except in a very vague way, what the brain can do, what the heart can do, what the circulation can do.
So wouldn't it be good to introduce into the whole philosophical discussion
the notion that human biology is, in fact, a major factor in the way we see the world, in the way we see each other.
So I wouldn't want to embroider what I've done by calling it philosophy, but it's meant to be a contribution to people's understanding of culture and individuals.
What you do as exquisitely designed as the human body is,
It does come with its occasional flaws, doesn't it?
You bet, doesn't it?
Yeah.
And this seems to be where someone like yourself enters the equation, so to speak.
Well, yeah.
And we'll probably, no matter how we evolve, we probably won't evolve anymore.
We're always going to have those flaws.
You don't think we'll evolve anymore?
No.
You know, I've had this out with one of my molecular biology friends at great length, so I've looked into it very carefully.
Except for responses to certain environmental changes like new infectious diseases, certain climatic changes apparently in other parts of the world, there's no evidence.
that we have evolved beyond the appearance of so-called modern Homo sapiens between 25,000 and 40,000 years ago.
But evolution takes a much longer period than that.
Yeah, but evolution... I guess we probably control it at some point.
Evolution is in response to environmental dangers, and we've made ourselves so independent of the environment that there's no need for natural selection anymore,
I mean, suppose a mutation occurred in which one could resist temperatures of 20 below zero.
That would have been a great thing in caveman times, and that person, you know, or those mutations would have become dominant.
But big deal, who cares?
So it's just going to die out.
There's a recent book, Harvard University Press, Freeman Dyson, Imagine the World.
fascinating.
I don't know the book, of course, I know Dyson.
But I do, and I thought he's thinking about, you know, not only life a hundred years from now, but a thousand years from now.
Yeah.
But he's putting a very, I mean, it's not science fiction, it's really a brilliant physicist thinking about it, and he never once mentions evolution, and it's very interesting.
It's all cultural evolution.
It really is.
He doesn't talk about it.
He has no, he has nothing to offer on how the body might, I hadn't thought of that until this
But I'll bet he thought about it.
I'll bet he thought about it and decided there was no point because there's not going to be any change.
So this is a continued... Of course, as you said, Glenn suggested the way to continue the exploration.
It was kind of a skeletal suggestion.
What is it?
To me, it's gripping is the fact that you do accomplish this through example.
individual stories I mean explain to me why that is how it happens that this is the way that you choose to but that's the clinical physician in me and my interest my basic interest if I had to choose between the elements of biology and physiology on the one hand and what human beings do on the other hand I would always opt for human beings and that's why
When I finished medical school, I elected a career in clinical work, taking care of sick people rather than a career in research.
So I can't even think about physiology without thinking about how it works in people.
And so when I write, it's just a natural thing, after I talk about, let's say, how the heart works, to immediately go off and talk about somebody I know whose heart perhaps didn't work so well.
which would illustrate what can be done and what the defect is.
So this has always been the way I think, and therefore it's natural for me to write that way.
But the drama of these stories, I mean, the very first one with that woman.
Just reading that, you're sweating.
I mean, this human being is about to expire.
Do you know, I was doing a reading the first week, actually before the book took,
doing a reading at the yale co-op and she walked in with her husband it was like the sun was shining around her it was the most terrific thing then in a case like this obviously you must talk to the individuals that were right about this oh yes oh yes and that that that's not her name i think that is her name oh she yeah then that is you changed yeah the doctors i challenged the doctors i did at the last second i think for obvious reasons because they they never called her
They didn't have a clue, but I did it at the last second.
I was going to use their names, and then I thought, you know, in actual fact, these guys screwed this thing up.
They should have realized she wasn't bleeding from a tule pregnancy.
They needn't have panicked quite so much.
I don't know.
So I decided I would just change this.
But everybody in New Haven, number one, knows who they are.
Number two, their names are so close to their real names.
I'm not going to put that in a piece.
It's pretty interesting.
Did you ever read John Wolf's The Right Stuff?
No.
He compares, you know, fighter pilots with the right stuff.
He said the only comparison he could make, I mean, with his standards and all sorts of masters of the universe, is a surgeon, you know, as a doctor.
Don't misunderstand me.
A person who feels supremely confident.
Oh, yeah.
And almost the ebullience that you feel, the sense of elation.
I mean, this is not frustration and sadness and anger.
It's exhilaration.
All this blood for me, I would probably collapse, you know.
At the sight of it.
Yeah, of course you wouldn't because you would be so well trained by the time you ever got into a situation where you're responsible for that.
And that's the element that I think people who haven't been in such situations don't quite comprehend.
Training is everything.
Of course, selection.
And you have to pre-select these people to have a certain personality type.
But by the time they get through with a fighter pilot or we get through with a young surgeon,
He is prepared for just about anything.
Now, granted, every once in a while, a kid does collapse and find that he can't handle it or has to rush for help.
But by and large, my old professor of cardiac surgery used to say, an emergency prepared for is not an emergency.
And we sort of click over in our minds before a routine operation, every single thing that could possibly go wrong, and we are ready for it.
The other thing that's always interested me, ever since I finished training and became an attending surgeon on my own, is the intense need for equanimity.
That even if you feel yourself starting to lose it, you know that if there's any evidence that you lose it, everybody in the room is going to lose it and it's going to be over.
So you kind of grab a hold of yourself.
Some of it is just sheer willpower.
You grab a hold of yourself.
And you don't let yourself get nervous.
Now, granted, a lot of people can't not let themselves get nervous, but it's important to bear in mind how many times you have seen dreadful things in an operating room and almost always they turn out well.
Oh, yeah.
And that's what I always would tell myself when I was starting to feel, oh, my God, this is overwhelming.
the fact that I have in my life almost never seen a real disaster occur in a modern operating room, that we always get out of it.
We always figure out a way out of it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, disasters are for television and the movies.
Modern surgeons are so well trained and have such extraordinary backup that they'll get out of most anything.
So this phrase, dying on the table,
It really doesn't happen that often.
I had a 30-year career.
I saw two patients die on the table, on my table, on my table, and each time they were almost dead by the time we started operating, and it was done in desperation, and when they died, you know, okay.
But dying on the table, except in cardiac cases where anything can go wild because of an arrhythmia that's uncontrollable, with very, very sick hearts,
is quite unusual.
That's very reassuring.
It should be reassuring.
In the case with Marge, though, where you talk about how you plan for different exigencies and things that might go wrong, you literally walked into this situation, and this had to be done seat of the pants.
Right.
But what saved Marge is that I knew a sure way to cut off all the blood supply to the ambulance.
which is to put my hand on that.
That was your fallback.
That was my fallback.
That allowed you time to figure out what was going on.
You know, my first experience with that, I was a medical student.
I was a third-year medical student, and I was operating with a senior professor of urology, and he was 70, and he shouldn't have been operating anymore.
But he was a great man.
He was a great international figure, and no one could tell him to stop operating.
And he put a tie down on the artery of the kidney, and it lifted.
The artery broke.
It was so sclerotic from arteriosclerosis, it broke.
And he just fell apart.
And the resident packed the wound to try to stop it.
And my job was to press on the packing.
You know, I was an intern.
I was 24 years old.
All my mind, I was pressing like this.
They called in the chief of cardiac surgery, who opened the chest.
and got the aorta in the chest.
So this guy came in to the rescue.
Right, and the patient was saved.
Now, I never forgot that.
The only thing I could think to myself, why the hell do you have to open the chest to do that?
Why can't you just get the aorta below the diaphragm?
Which would have been a perfectly straight, but everybody was getting kind of excited, you know.
The old man was involved, the great professor.
He had pulled back at this point, right?
Was he alive at this point?
Oh, yeah.
He's out of the loop at this point.
He was completely out of the loop at this point.
So, at that point, I determined I'll just put my hand on the aorta.
And I've done it a number of times over the years, you know, maybe three or four times in a situation where you get into a bleeding abdomen or an unexpected blood vessel cuts loose and you have to do this.
But
I've never been under such dramatic circumstances with a patient with no blood pressure coming into an operating room where I had no idea what the hell is going on.
That was the amazement.
But the other thing that, and I pointed out in the book, is when you have spent your life in certain parts of the body, you really feel they belong to you.
and the belly just belongs to it.
I love that line.
I've got it flagged over using it as a story.
And again, I don't mean to be stretching the comparison with pilots, but there really is this, I did an interview with Chuck Yeager once, and I said, what quality impresses you most in the pilot?
He said, ours, ours in the cockpit.
Experience is what he was saying.
That's exactly what you're telling me right now.
In other words,
You know, who do you want next to you, a rookie?
That's right.
Somebody who knows exactly, you don't have to look.
You know there's a lot of blood there, but you know exactly what you're going to feel when you're putting your hand down there.
You've done this countless times.
There's no mystery to you.
And you know that real disasters are rare.
And what an enormous steadying influence that is to know that you've been in trouble, you've seen your colleagues in trouble, and just about every time you get out of this.
The moment you start feeling the tiniest bit of fear, that's the reassurance.
You said it was important in this particular case, and then you said, in general, how you do mask the face, in a sense, the identity of the patient.
And in this case, you really didn't even want to know that she had brothers.
I'm not just meaning to stick with Mark, because the brother's story is just as dramatic, but I have to say, that opening one,
You know, as Lyndon Johnson used to say, we've got to get them in the tent.
And then you could preach to them.
I never heard that expression.
That's good.
You certainly got us into the tent with that opening.
It was gripping, really.
It was a gripping, gripping story.
And then your sense of pacing, I mean, from that one bang, right on to the next one and the next one after that.
It's just the way I think.
You know, it's...
It's just the way my mind works.
I can't stay with textbook stuff very long.
I have to start putting it into the context of some living human being.
Now, do you visualize a reader?
Is this the supposed intelligent general reader that you're reaching for?
The reader's me.
The reader's always me without a medical education.
I assume a reader is curious or he wouldn't have gotten this far.
He wouldn't have bought the book in the first place or borrowed the book, and he wouldn't have reached this point.
So I assume he's curious.
The attrition process has brought them to this point.
That's right, that they're still there with me.
And if they're still there with me at this point, it's my obligation to make it interesting for them in the same way it's interesting for me.
I've reached this point because I'm fascinated by it.
I want them to be fascinated by it the same way I am.
So I'm really the reader.
You know, my style, someone once said, this guy's got a 19th century style.
But, okay, that's the way I talk.
That's the way I write.
It's my voice.
Nothing wrong with 19th century style.
Yeah.
In fact, just 19th century, I was just reading with my younger daughter.
I was just working English.
class years reading Light in August by Faulkner, you know, 60s, 70s, 60s, 70-year-old book.
Amazing how beautifully written, not just Faulkner, but how much time and care they took with the phrasing, you know, 67 years ago, before we had all this infiltration of other media influences.
Oh, yeah.
A leisurely pace that he sets up that you can
I don't know the relevance that has to anything we're talking about.
No, I just had that experience.
You know the work of Beryl Bainbridge, English writer?
I know her work, yeah.
She's got a new book out called Every Man for Himself about the Titanic.
Oh, really?
And I met her.
I was just last week at this literary festival in Wales, and she and I did something together on stage, and so I decided I'd better read her book.
she writes it in the style that books were written in at the time of the sinking of the titanic and at first it seems just a little strange and awkward and then when you realize what she's doing you fall into this thing you can't get out of it you just can't stop reading um you point out that this is not the first time this title has been used yes and that you are paying homage i guess to a degree to maybe a
Well, most particularly to Walter B. Cannon, who of course worked at the Harvard Medical School.
He, in 1932, I think it was, wrote this book called The Wisdom of the Body, in which he was exploring what's called the sympathetic nervous system, the part of the nervous system that takes care of housekeeping functions, you know, the heart rate, how the intestine works, how the blood vessels clamp down, how the eye dilates.
And it was really for popular consumption.
It's a little tough going for popular consumption, but every medical student of the 40s, 50s, and 60s read that book.
I don't want to make a pun, but it was a canon for us to read this book.
In the introduction, he points out that he took the title from Ernest Starling, who's the man who discovered hormones, who at the beginning... And I got a hold of Starling's original speech in which he uses this title, The Wisdom of the Body, and it's got
a little epigraph.
In the epigraph, he doesn't say where it comes from, but I'm interested in the Bible, and I found that it's from Job.
Yeah, I found that it doesn't say where it's from, but it's clearly from Job.
And who hath given wisdom to the inner parts?
It all comes from that.
And the irony is, of course, to Job, the wisdom comes from God.
to Walter B. Cannon and to Starling and then to Charles Sherrington, who used the title even later, the wisdom comes from the natural processes of natural selection.
It's not by God.
And so the natural tension in the book becomes, is this chemical driven, is this God driven?
And if it's
Chemical-driven, does that necessarily mean that God never had a hand in it?
And as you know, as the book goes on, I deal with this, not very deeply, but just enough to point out that nothing I say here rules out the existence of God.
So all of this is really in homage to these three great men.
What is the response that you, the overwhelming response that you received,
from how we value him.
Was that influential at all?
Only a writer could ask that question.
Because you know, and I know, that when your work has been well received, you dare.
You dare more.
You know, you always try to find line when you write.
You go beyond that line, and it's ludicrous or stiff.
It doesn't work.
A lot of writers don't dare get near that line.
And because of the reception of How We Die, I said, people like the way I write.
They understand it.
They stay with it.
I'm going to move the line even further.
And that's what I did, essentially.
You know, you take great risks in writing.
You raise the bar a little bit.
Yeah.
So I did that.
And specifically raising the bar?
Speculating.
I feel now that people who have read my stuff, Doctors, then How We Die, are willing to accept the way I speculate and the way I conjecture about things.
And so, in this book, I dared to speculate further by trying to speculate about the origins of the human spirit, the origins of culture.
which I don't think I would have had the nerve to do had I not had this extraordinary reception to how we died.
Well, again, you have to set a challenge for yourself, too.
Sure.
Why not give it a shot?
And also, you know, the speculation grew so completely naturally out of studying molecular biology and then organ biology that I thought, my God, this makes sense to me.
Why not write about it?
So I did.
Tell me about constructing the book, too, because it does have a beginning, a middle, and an end.
It's not just going from one part of the body to the other.
You do see it, I think, as one exquisite whole, I guess.
Well, I'm going to say something that's going to surprise you.
I never construct anything I write.
I have no outline for anything.
Neither do I, by the way.
Really?
Yeah.
I don't.
It works, doesn't it?
It does.
It's here.
It really works.
It's in there all the time.
It does come out whole, though.
It comes out whole.
That's amazing.
You see, you're the only other person I've ever heard say that.
I trust my subconscious mind, and it's whenever I run into someone who's intelligent who says, I want to write a book, I encourage them.
Because I think we've got a lot more in our head
than we ever dream about consciously, and it's only when we write it that it comes out, and I don't think these are scattered thoughts.
I think that these are organized ways of looking at things.
I get up every morning, I start writing about 8.15.
I will often read what I wrote the day before.
Sometimes I don't, but I never read beyond that.
I just
pick up where I quit.
And I'll quit anywhere.
I'll quit because I'm tired.
I'll quit because there's a tennis game that I want to play.
I'll quit because I've got a class to teach.
So I'll quit at the end of a sentence.
And I'll pick up the next day, and sentence by sentence, I don't know what I'm going to do.
Do you write from beginning to end, or do you kind of jump around?
I just started my new book, and I basically started writing what I
guess will be the final chapter, because this feels right.
Because it feels right.
It absolutely feels right.
I feel I know this, and I know precisely where I'm entering it and where it's going.
It's almost frighteningly easy.
It's going to be a great book.
But then, of course, it leads now to this other area that's going to come before it.
I did a piece on Otto Bettman.
Remember the Bettman Archive?
Bill Gates bought his archive.
When that was announced in the New York Times, there was one little paragraph that this man is alive and well and living in Florida.
Batman's alive?
Not only alive, but lucid.
He must be 100 years old.
He's 96.
My wife and I were on an airplane within a week.
We spent two days with him.
Because he is so perfect.
He has touched every decade of the 20th century.
I would have a chapter on the Jewish emigrate booksellers who fled Hitler and came here and how they
They brought with him the whole European attitude of Rosenbach scholarship.
Rosenbach, yeah.
Rosenbach was born here, but Krauss was born here.
Rosenbach was born here.
Rosenbach was a Philly guy, yeah, but he's married way before Hitler, actually, Rosenbach.
Right, right, right.
But anyway, Otto was a rare books librarian in Leipzig, and then, of course, he saw this idea of the image of the picture.
He basically, you know, Life Magazine, he was their first supplier.
came with a dozen pictures, but he's also a world authority on Bach.
And while we were there, he played for my wife and I, a little piece on his organ.
And I said to him, why Bach?
This is in the prologue to my book.
And he said, because, why Bach?
He said, good question.
He said, because Bach always returns to where he started.
And it says it much more eloquently than that.
But, you know, it's the capo or whatever it is, but
I always like to come back.
I have two chapters in the new book, Continuum I and Continuum II.
I always wanted, for me, the unity is to, I don't care where you're going, to try and come back to that same place that you started at.
It's a symmetry.
It's a symmetry that is the way our minds work.
You know, I should tell you about a guy you probably know very well.
Unfortunately, he's been dead about ten years, but
His books are here in Boston now, Vern Dibner.
You know the Dibner collection?
Oh, I'm going to write that one down.
Let me tell you a little bit about Dibner.
The Dibner archive, I think, is now owned by Brandeis.
Dibner was an Eastern European Jewish immigrant who came here when he was in his early teens, I believe.
This is an excuseable right without a pen.
Here it is.
Okay.
B-E-R-N.
D-I-B-N-E-R.
He came here before World War I as an immigrant with five or six brothers, and he went initially to Cooper Union.
It gets even better than that because there was a school on the Lower East Side set up by a
Protestant clergyman for Jewish boys, and he brought these kids into the American mainstream.
So Byrne Dibner goes to this school, gets into Cooper Union, and he flunks out.
So he goes to some school, which later grows up to be New York Tech, to which, incidentally, he's given millions of dollars, and learns about electrical engineering, and he invents in the 20s
Well, first he goes in the Navy in World War I, serves, I don't know what he served on, but he's a seaman, a basic seaman in World War I. Comes back, invents this electrical connection of the 20s, electrical connector that was bought by the Brooklyn Union Gas Company.
And by the time he's in his early 30s, he's a multimillionaire.
And it's, you know, it's 1931, 32.
He's got a partner.
So he moves his business out of the Bronx up to Connecticut and says,
I've now got a lot of money.
I want to buy books in the history of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and science.
And he amasses... Oh, World War II comes.
He's 42 years old.
He enlists a buck private in the Air Force because he loves this country.
He serves the whole war, finds himself in 45 in Germany with all the money he needs, and he just starts buying like crazy.
He's very...
This is the kind of person I want in this chapter.
Oh, it's the perfect person.
So he comes back to the States, and in the 60s, maybe in the 70s, he builds a huge and beautiful library in Norwalk, Connecticut, because that's where one of his plants is.
I've heard of this guy.
Yeah, it's the Burndy Corporation, named after him, U-R-N-D-Y Corporation.
U-R-N-D-Y.
That's his corporation.
All founded on one electrical connector that he invented when he was in his 20s.
Is there some literature on them?
I have literature on them at home, and if you contact the library at Brandeis... And his son, David, is still alive, and David can tell you all about him.
He gets an honorary degree from Brandeis.
He gets other honorary degrees.
So here's this guy who loves this country so much that he's enlisted as a private lawyer.
He ends up a lieutenant colonel.
He comes back and builds this library.
The business is now an international business, and he's giving money away.
He ends up giving, I think it was half of his library, to the Smithsonian, where it's housed, I think in a special collection.
Smithsonian or the Library of Congress?
Smithsonian.
Because he had also a collection of instruments.
He's got Pasteur's microscope.
When you go into his... He sounds good for me.
He's perfect for you.
He's made for you.
Because, yeah, he is.
And he's right here in Boston.
I mean, he's dead, but he's... But, I mean, on ways you can't even imagine.
Yeah.
Again, it's sort of a migration of books and ideas from a war-torn
When you start writing about him, give me a call, because I had a lot of dealings with him.
203-776-5635.
Let me give you a card.
I think you'd like to see the story.
You bet.
I'm going to Paris in three weeks for this new book.
Oh, I'll work.
the major international component of this new book.
Oh.
Well, I'm going to do a tour, a pilgrimage.
It's going to be a travel piece of libraries through history, but how significant they've been.
You know, it's not just going to libraries.
It's going to Monte Cassino, where the Rule of Benedict was won.
It's going to St.
Galway, which was the great monastic scriptorium.
Going to Pergamon, which is still the shell of the library.
It's still there, so then you can talk about Alexandria.
Going to Seville, which was established by Columbus's son, a library that's the great Columbus Library in Seville.
It's been in continuous existence for 500 years.
I've never heard of it.
Not many people have, and it has all of the apples, diaries, logs.
When you think of the American experience, the European experience, it's totally bracketed by print.
When Columbus got back, he announced his discovery in a letter, which was published.
It's called The Columbus Letter.
Uh-huh.
You can write about these things by going to the, you know, if you want to go forward and forward and forward.
Wow.
And then I'm going to go to the immediate present and the future.
I've already been to the brand-new British Library.
I've had a brand-new bibliotech desk, and I'll go into the brand-new German Library.
That's $4 billion worth of libraries that have all opened within six months of each other.
What about the one in Moscow, the big national library in Moscow?
I'm going to have an Eastern European chapter, Sarajevo, starting with a description of books, because for the future, we can go into wonderful directions.
One night in 1994, 1992 was it?
1.2 million books destroyed deliberately as part of the ethnic cleansing thing.
If you're going to kill a people, you have to kill their memory, kill their history.
And so now there's an international effort.
It's only had five paragraphs in the New York Times.
Well, yeah, why do we know that?
Well, we don't, because it's not, I mean, people, of course, are extremely important.
But books, they figure, I've already interviewed the librarian who was out there that morning when precious manuscripts were falling out of the sky.
And he said, it's something, when you hold a manuscript in your hands, and the letters, they turn black before they disappear in your hands.
And this was targeted in this story.
You know, if you're going to destroy a people, I mean, this is not unique.
This has happened many, many times.
So we've got to write about Eastern European book culture, post-Soviet period.
books of the future.
I've been over to MIT where they have what they call the future book, the digital revolution.
What's happening to books in universities?
A lot of places are very quietly getting rid of their books and sending them to landfills.
Don't I know?
A very prestigious Ivy League institution.
I go from Harvard, which I opened this chapter I was just telling you about, and they have this
They have the Southboro campus of Harvard.
No Harvard graduate has ever heard knows that Harvard has a campus out in Southboro, Massachusetts, but it's where they bury the books.
They have these modules.
They're saving their books.
There's no such thing as a dead book at Harvard.
So they have 14 million books, and they're going to keep them.
They're going to save them.
It's all computers and everything out there.
They have 14 million.
They have 13.8.
They'll pass 14.
We've only got six.
Cornell has six, eight, and they're going down to six by the year 2000.
Wow, wow.
When you're ready to do that big library in Moscow, give me a call.
My daughter is Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Russia, and she knows all these things and knows how to get to things.
Really?
Yeah.
So give me a call.
I need help in Eastern Europe.
Sure you do.
Edward Kasaneck at the New York Public Library, who's head of the Ukrainian department here, is helping me.
But I might have a good bite.
You never know if you can confuse a little State Department enforcement.
Oh, yeah.
You see, you'll want to deal with the cultural attaché in Moscow.
I don't know who that is right now, who it'll be when you're there.
But those are the people who, you know, in any country,
that you're working in, it helps to just be in touch with a cultural attache.
Every, as you know, in every embassy there's a person whose job it is to handle anything that has to do with the culture of that country.
Some of them are totally inept, but some of them are really very good.
Especially Eastern European.
I know I'm very comfortable in England and in France and Italy and places like that.
It's going to be a fun book.
See, this is not a great book.
Collecting it all, but it's book culture.
The subtitle is Book
book places and book culture.
I mean, he was a new millennium.
You may want, you know, his name, Alexander Schenker, mean anything to you?
He's the... I don't know, Israel is Schenker, but... No, Alexander, S-C-H-E-N-K-E-R.
He's the big professor of Slavic studies at Yale.
I'd love to do it.
I just did this fellow up in Toronto.
Dr. Simmons at Oxford.
He's just retired from All Souls College.
He's a major person in Ukraine.
He's Dr. Alexander Schencher at Yale.
He's a man.
Well, Alex is about 70 now, but he looks like he's about 40.
He's just marvelous.
What am I talking about?
Not at all.
And when it comes to religious books, which you're going to definitely want to be interested in, Eastern European religious books, the guy to talk to, and you know this name, is Yaroslav Pelikan.
Oh, that's famous, yeah.
Yeah, and he's at Yale, too.
You know, Tony Grafton at Princeton is marvelous.
A writer to be a part-time Gregorian who's coming back to New York.
He's wonderful.
Paul Leclerc is being very helpful to me because he loved my book.
Of course.
The fellow who's setting me up at the Bibliothèque Nationale, his name is Thierry Brier.
He's the head of the library.
Paul says, use my name.
I use his name.
The guy calls me.
He's totally setting up my whole itinerary environment.
I said, I can't think of it.
He said, we know Mr. Nick Clayton.
He said, very well.
We respect him.
He recommends you.
He said, we'll do everything we can to help you.
You know that the director of the Congress Library of Commerce, Billington, has been interviewed already.
Yeah, OK.
He's already been interviewed.
No, I've done about 100 interviews already for the new book.
I wanted it to be swell.
I noticed, for instance, your new book is bigger than the other one, by the way.
Yeah, well, they didn't want it to be that big, but I just
So tell me about the work in progress.
Because the book certainly speaks for itself.
I don't want to question about things.
This is just between you and me, because I don't think Glenn would be happy if it got into the public domain.
Once again, it's Glenn's idea, but it fits in exactly and precisely with what one can only call the body of one's work.
You remember in As You Like It, The Seven Ages of Man?
Yeah, and what I'm going to do is I'm going to take the sequential developmental stages and talk about development psychology, biological changes, worldview changes, all of those things that occur as we progress.
And the subject matter, the anecdotal matter, is going to be me.
It's essentially going to be...
I write about my grandmother, for example, what my family was like.
I'm going to focus on family members and people I have known to explore.
I won't write.
Let me just say, well, don't worry about the machine being on it.
Oh, I understand that.
I wouldn't say this to anybody else, but I can say it to you.
Well, we can say that there's a work in progress that will continue your exploration and considerations of the human condition, essentially.
You know, based on how many years now?
Sixty-six and a half as a human being.
A physician since 1955, so it's, you know, 42 years.
You know, one, you don't use the word that I could see.
Maybe you used that.
I was reading too quickly.
You don't use the word synergy, but you do suggest that we are greater than the sum of all our parts.
Oh, absolutely.
Which is synergy.
Yeah, absolutely.
And maybe you could just give me a comment on that.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, you know...
The only reason that biological organisms stay alive, their only function, as any good biologist will tell you, is to stay alive, to preserve the DNA to the next generation.
So given biologically what we have, it has been provided by natural selection just to keep us safe from the environment.
But we have created, with that, we've created culture.
We've created music and poetry, and we've created
Out of sex, we've created sexuality and all the good and bad things that go with that.
We have created our ways of dealing with each other, our ways of childbearing, and it didn't have to happen that way.
The only thing that had to happen was we had to keep the next generation alive just long enough to reproduce, but we've done much, much, much greater than that.
So if an entire civilization can do that, if an entire species can do that, homo sapiens,
It's because each individual in that species can do much beyond what his simple biological needs are.
So each of us, because of the free will that we have developed, can add to the culture, add to the notion of individual love for people, of the association within families and society.
So we become greater than the sum of our biological
There's a richness in our lives.
Freud pointed out, I can't remember exactly where, oh, in Civilization of Discontents, pointed out that beauty, the notion of beauty, has no biological function whatsoever.
It is something we have found.
We've found it.
We have created it.
It's an extra.
Whether it's a violin sonata,
or whether it's a poem or a graphic art or the beauty we see in the faces of our children, we interpret things in ways that elevate us, that make us much more in simple biology.
And the flip side of that, things we find offensive, I would think is the same.
When I think of even smells of things, I mean, smells we find offensive makes smells we find pleasing.
Is this just something that we've created for ourselves?
Well, some are biological because they produce an aversion and we stay away.
If some things smell bad, they're dangerous to us.
You're not going to eat a putrefied piece of meat because it smells bad.
So this is part of the training.
Right.
But at the same... No, well, it's actually physically offensive to us, even if you had no training.
If you were a feral child, you were out in the wilderness, you would stay away from
putrefied meat because it just has an awful odor.
It makes you sick.
Yeah, but others know that.
And you know that inherently, instinctively.
But other smells, we learn as time goes on, are offensive because of experiences we have had with them.
And individual people can't stand certain odors, whereas another guy might say, gee, that's wonderful.
Because there are cultural differences.
I mean, the people eat and they think are wonderful.
Yeah.
So some are instinctive for a whole species, and some are learned as a result of either cultural or individual experience.
And I know how deeply concerned you are with matters of ethics and medical ethics, you know, the continuing question, of course, and it's on the front page of the New York Times again today, developing, you know, here's today's Times.
Considering the unthinkable protocol for assisted suicide, you know, page one of today's New York Times, and then we see stories about calling human beings, whether or not it should be outlawed, the president is now thinking.
I mean, there are just two, I guess these are medical issues, aren't they?
Oh, yes, they're medical issues.
Maybe you could give me a brief.
Well, it's impossible to be brief because, you know, whenever...
I've been thinking a lot about this and talking to colleagues about it because there's something I'm trying to get to the bottom of.
It seems to me that whenever a society has to make rules about something, it means that the ability of the individual to cope with those problems has fallen apart.
So society has to make rules overall.
It's my notion that individual morality has eroded
in the second half of the 20th century.
We knew until about the middle 60s, everybody understood that the morality of Western society was essentially Christian morality.
You may want to call it Judeo-Christian.
It's the same thing.
It was Christian morality.
We knew what you did if you were a good person.
With the rising up of this sort of self-determination movement that started with the kids in the late 60s, they developed in our society what you can only call a moral relativism, and that's the term people use.
Your idea of what's good is as good as, or my idea is as good as yours.
Along with that went a breakdown in our notion of authority figures.
Everybody got
got the idea that there's an egalitarianism in our society, so that there's no real morality.
Morality is relative.
And the result of it has been the enormous rise, I think, in things like pornography on our TV screens at night, in laxity about the family, in laxity about raising our children,
in a general air of permissiveness that I think is killing the structure of society.
It has also invaded science.
It has also invaded relationships of doctors with patients.
But most importantly, it's eroded the individual scientist or clinician's notion of what's right and wrong to do with his work.
And so,
We now need rules because we can't depend on individuals anymore.
I think there is much more cheating in science, not just because it's being uncovered more.
I really believe there's much more cheating in science than ever existed until the last 20 years.
There are a lot of reasons for it, obviously different kinds of pressures, but part of it has to do with this moral relativism.
There are no longer absolute
criteria of morality.
So the society has to step in and make laws, and that's what ethics are.
Ethics are a negotiated system of principles that everybody agrees are the right thing to do.
So I think that's why the whole idea of the profession of medical ethics has arisen, that society is weak, morality in society is weak, and we have to create this.
Of course,
The whole field of medical ethics is new.
Some are philosophers, some are clinicians, some are lawyers, some are ministers.
They're trying to learn from each other.
Some of the stuff you read in the medical ethics literature is absolutely laughable because of ignorance of what really happens.
Some of it is very good and very important.
So we're in this terrible state of flux, and what complicates the issue is
that in the last five years or so with molecular biology, we have reached a point where the implications of the science are so enormous for our society that we can no longer leave it to the scientists to decide what they should research.
And for the species.
That's right.
If you can make a human being in about 200 years, somebody's going to do that.
For the whole species, that's right.
So because there is so much cultural involvement in the outcomes of science, the whole society has to have a say in what's done.
And it's interesting to me that that committee of the Institute of Medicine, whose report came out a couple of days ago, No More Human Cloning, as far as I know, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, I could easily be wrong, this is the first time
government or society has ever overtly said you can't do certain kinds of research.
Now, granted, the research of fetal parts for Parkinsonism was stopped or slowed down.
The government stopped funding research on the artificial heart, but
Well, it was a failure, too.
Well, it was a failure, yeah.
They were just jumping way ahead of what they had the technology for.
They did that with heart transplantation originally, too, and they should have stopped that for a while.
But this is an enormous step the government has taken.
They've appointed this committee of very wise and able people who have said, you've got to stop.
This is
Step back.
Step back and let's look at this.
And I'm very pleased about that.
I'm enormously pleased about it.
You know, if somebody within the argument could be, well, what if you talk about this being an exquisite, the body being an exquisite thing, but has its flaws.
Yeah.
So what if they say, well, look, we can clone out these, not clone out, we can, by tampering and tinkering with DNA, we can get rid of them.
the flaws that cause people to have heart attacks, but we can slow down the aging process.
It's the worst thing that could happen.
I mean, it is.
Would you agree that it is necessary for there to be a renewal of generations?
I wrote that and how we did it.
That's exactly what you did.
That's right.
We had this discussion that, you know, we come around.
It's like spring.
Every spring, it's a whole crop.
Absolutely.
You know, what happens in the next generation should not be decided by an old guy like me.
It should be decided by someone in his 20s or 30s.
Yeah.
You need new perspective.
I was so pleased.
I'm going to a conference at the American Antiquarian Society, which happens to be in Worcester.
It's nationally renowned.
And there's a conference going on there in the history of the book, where we can tell about society and certain private objects in books.
But it's wonderful.
But I was so pleased to see
I was by far 54.
I was the old, clearly the oldest person in the room.
So young people.
I liked it.
The people who were running the seminar were in their forties.
These were young graduate students and librarians interested in books and artifacts, and to me it was wonderful.
I don't want a bunch of old farts like myself making this.
Well, I feel the same way.
You know, there's one thing.
We're old on the one hand, but very happy on the other.
Well, there's one thing that's called wisdom, and something else called creativity.
You know, the wisdom comes to us.
It has to do with experience, hours in the cockpit.
It has to do with a lot of things.
When it comes to creativity, that is largely the province of beyond.
A classic example is who wins Nobel Prizes in the sciences?
There are all these guys under 40, or at least their work was done when they were under 40.
The only person who has ever written a book like The Wisdom of the Body is a fellow named Logan Clendenning, who in 1927 wrote a book for Knopf, interestingly, called The Human Body.
He tried to do what I tried to do.
He was a skeptic, a religious skeptic, didn't believe there was a god.
And he writes at the end of the book, he's writing about death, and he says that, you know, life had to occur, given the chemicals and the electricity in the air, you know, lightning,
water, that light had to occur.
He said, but to conceive of death, he said, that is the only real evidence we have of a master power, a master intellect, because it's death that's the great thing.
It's death that allows for the renewal.
It's death that allows for the improvement of species.
And so I feel very, I agree with him, I feel very strongly death is an absolute necessity.
for our species to continue on this earth, and for at least cultural evolution to continue.
Yeah.
I think that's, you know, about an hour of tape.
Would you inscribe my book?
Oh, sure.
Just exactly enough.